1 
PALABRAS DEL PRESIDENTE DE LA REPÚBLICA 
ENRIQUE BOLAÑOS GEYER 
“Logros del Gobierno de Nicaragua, Perspectivas Económicas y Política Exterior de Nicaragua” 
Universidad de Houston, Miércoles 5 de Noviembre de 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. I value your invitation to address this prestigious 
University and to talk about Nicaragua, as well 
as our relation with the United States of 
America. 
 
2. Some of you may remember an old ad from an 
advertising firm that came out in the late 
seventies or early eighties, trying to exemplify 
the need for any business to advertise and make 
their products known to the Corporate 
Consumer. It showed a man –a businessman– 
having a strong and nasty look while asking 
doubtful questions on where to invest his hard-
earned money.    
 
3. In a way, that is the same situation I find when I 
invite businessmen to invest in Nicaragua: Some 
tell me that they don’t know who we are. Others 
still wonder if we still ask for payoffs or bribes 
to approve investments. I tell them about 
CAFTA, but some yet ask: What is CAFTA?   
 
 
 
 
What do you produce? How good are you at 
producing whatever you do?   
 
4. Well, I am here as President of Nicaragua. I am here 
to take this opportunity to answer these questions, to 
tell you about the New Nicaragua,  
and to encourage investment and job creation in my 
country.  
 
Let me tell you who we are:   
 
5. Let me start by answering the first question asked by 
some of the businessmen I described: “I don’t know 
who you are.”   
 
6. I studied in Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, 
Missouri, and I worked in my country for over 30 
years, having no ties whatsoever with politics. I built 
my own business to become the largest cotton 
producer in Central America until the Sandinista 
regime punished me by confiscating all my business in 
1985.
2 
7. Some of  you may remember that as President of 
the Nicaraguan businessmen’s umbrella 
organization, COSEP during the 1980's, I fought  
for the struggle for democracy, human rights 
and the restoration of the rule of law in 
Nicaragua.   
 
8. Ever since, on my own, I taught myself 
Computer Programmer to be able to support my 
family. I have never left my country, not even to 
escape the hardships of the Sandinista years. 
Thank God I managed to survive.   
 
9. I had deep feelings about my country. A rich 
land full of valuable natural resources that has 
been mismanaged since our independence. Our 
Income per capita tells it all: 700 dollars per 
year; e.i. 2 dollars per person per day: barely 
above Haiti’s.   
 
10. This situation has to be improved for the benefit 
of my people. I am trying to make the 
difference.     
 
11. Let me tell it again –because people tend to 
forget– that on November 2001, 93% of the 
voting population voluntarily went to the polls 
in Nicaragua, and 54% voted for the new vision 
I presented in the campaign for the creation of a 
“New Era for Nicaragua.” This meant a 
landslide with more than 14 points over the next 
contender: Mr. Ortega. 
 
12.  As President elect, I visited Washington on 
November 21st and Secretary Colin Powell, that 
visited us in Managua last Monday, said: 
  
13. “I assured the President-Elect that the United 
States will stand by him and that we would 
support his efforts and we will do everything we 
could possible to work with international 
financial institutions and others and to start to 
create conditions that will draw private 
investment into Nicaragua, as well as the 
international financial institutions to help 
Nicaragua come through this difficult period 
and to assist him in his efforts” 
 
14. The United States and other countries are helping us in 
this mission of creating the New Nicaragua, but I am 
not alone. Let me present my Cabinet to you –the ones 
that accompany me in the task of creating the New Era 
of The New Nicaragua. I have:    
 
 Two PhD’s form Harvard, both from the Kennedy 
School (the Minister of Education and my Chief 
Economic Adviser).  
 
 One Jurist Doctor and one Master of Law from 
Harvard (the Minister of Health and the Attorney 
General).  
 
 Three Harvard MBA’s (the Minister of the Treasury, 
the Director of the Investment Promotion Service, and 
the President of the Energy Board).  
 
 One Master of Public Policy from Harvard (the Vice-
Minister of Foreign Affairs).  
 
 Two University of Texas Graduates (the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, BBA; and the Minister of Trade and 
Industry, Ph.D.).  
 
 One PhD from Stanford who studied under 
Condoleezza Rice (the Vice-Minister of Trade and 
Industry).  
 
 One MBA from Chicago (the President of the National 
Finance Institute) and another MBA from Wharton 
(our envoy to the Inter-American Development Bank).  
 
 One PhD from Cornell (the Adviser to the Minister of 
the Treasury).  
 
 One PhD from Oxford (the Ambassador to Brazil).  
 
 One PhD from the University of Bordeaux (the 
Ambassador to the UN in Geneva).  
 
 One PhD from Berlin and an MS from the Sorbonne 
(both are Advisers to the Foreign Minister).  
 
 One Master of Science, from the University of 
Delaware (the Ambassador to Spain).  
 
 Three members of our Foreign Service have advanced 
degrees from Columbia University:  two of them 
ladies, to boot: An Environmental Ambassador, our
3 
Trade Officer in Miami and our Minister-
Counsellor in our UN Mission.  
 
15. There are many other graduates, from many 
other prestigious schools, that will be tiresome 
to list them all today.    
16. Anyhow, we all make up a formidable team 
managed by a younger man of just about 75, all 
committed to make Nicaragua get out of the 
long lasting siesta to wake it up and get moving 
to win the pennant against poverty.   
 
17. Now you know who we are.     
 
Now let me tell you about CAFTA (Central 
America Free Trade Agreement).    
 
18. During the past few years, this region of 33 
million people has been subjected to various 
external shocks. Coffee export prices have 
dropped to their lowest level in history, while 
imported oil prices have risen to near record 
levels, US and European demand for our 
products has stagnated after “nine-eleven” and 
yet Central America has continued to progress 
faster than the rest of Latin America.    
 
19. Central America’s trade with the United States 
(over 21 billion in 2002) is third only after 
Mexico and Brazil, higher in value than US 
trade with Indonesia, India and Russia 
combined. Central America’s trade with the US 
is almost 4 times larger that the Chilean trade 
with the US.    
 
20. We are all located within two 2 hours flying 
time to the world’s largest market and have 
shores on both the Pacific Ocean and the 
Caribbean Sea, and within 3 hours flying time to 
Houston, too. 
 
21. As a show of businessmen’s expectation of 
opportunities in the region, our Trademark 
registrations in Nicaragua have almost doubled 
since the CAFTA was announced earlier this 
year and visits by businessmen and investors 
have become commonplace in all Central 
American capitals as well as at the free trade 
manufacturing zones.    
 
22. We are all located within two 2 hours flying time to 
the world’s largest market and have shores on both the 
Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea, and This 
CAFTA agreement will attract investment in the 
region, and especially in Nicaragua for the creation of 
jobs that we need.  
 
Let me talk a little bit about our economic growth.   
 
23. A long-term vision is tempered with that old Swedish 
saying that “if you do not know where you are going, 
any road will take you there”. Only when your sights 
are set on a long-term goal can you take the short steps 
that will take you there in hops and bounds, frog 
leaping sometimes, advancing at snail’s-pace 
sometimes but never stopping on the way to 
development.  
  
24. For Economic Growth is not a methodology, nor a 
state of mind, nor a way of doing things. Growth is the 
result of doing the right things in the economic arena.   
 
25. Micro-economically, we have been working under the 
guidance of Professor Michael Porter of the Harvard 
Institute for International Development in establishing 
a National Competitiveness Program that goes to the 
root of development.   
 
26. We seek to reduce transaction costs and, eventually, 
production costs, for those companies investing in 
Nicaragua.   
 
27. We have identified seven clusters where we are 
concentrating our scarce resources and development: 
(1) aquaculture and the blue revolution; (2) beef 
and dairy products; (3) electric energy generation; 
(4) wooden furniture and parts; (5) specialty 
coffee; (6) tourism and (7) agribusiness.  
 
28. Basic Infrastructure such as first roads and first ports 
will have to be provided by the Government. The 
private sector provides alternatives once the basic 
infrastructure is there, not before.   
 
29. For it is job creation through investment in the private 
sector the only way to get out of poverty.   
 
30. Let me humbly quote Mr. Porter himself about what 
he has seen in Nicaragua regarding microeconomic 
efforts at making the country more competitive:
4 
31. “I’m frankly amazed by all the advances made 
by the Government of President Bolaños … I 
have worked in many countries in the world, 
and it is easy to speak, what is difficult is to act; 
I find President Bolaños actions awesome.”   
 
National Plan for Development.   
 
32. Few weeks ago, we concluded a two day 
Consultation Group Meeting in Managua where 
representatives from donor friendly countries, 
international organizations like IMF, IDB, 
World Bank, CABEI, European Union 
delegates, ad others, made a thorough analysis 
of our National Plan for Development. The Plan 
was highly praised for it constitutes the road 
map for the future development of Nicaragua. 
No other country has designed such a deep and 
thorough plan.   
 
33. Besides, the analysis of our financial and 
economic performance was also highly 
evaluated and they recommended that Nicaragua 
has done its homework to merit the pardon of 
80% of the foreign debt according to the HIPC 
initiative. This means that we are on the right 
tract, and my government is building the basis 
for providing investors with good opportunities 
for the making of good business in Nicaragua. 
 
Let’s now talk about Anti Corruption.    
 
34. Anti-corruption is much more that putting 
corrupt officials in jail; it starts with a hard look 
at national values and lack of values, it entails a 
continuous effort at public sector reform with an 
eye on streamlining government while reducing 
the monopoly power of those who take 
decisions, and avoiding granting bureaucrats 
discretionary powers. 
 
35. An anti corruption drive entails looking for 
ways to make it expensive to undertake corrupt 
activities for the giver and for the taker in 
economic as well as social terms.   
 
36. This includes a revamping of the Judiciary 
system in the medium term and the introduction 
of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in 
the short run.    
37. However, while Transparency, Integrity and just plain 
Honesty are preconditions for investment to take 
place, they alone, are not enough. A silent and 
peaceful yet profound revolution is taking place in 
Central America. As a result of thorough 
anticorruption drives throughout the region there is a 
New Era taking shape.    
 
38. The ongoing moral renewal seeks to reinstate the rule 
of law, combat corruption, drug and arms trafficking, 
money laundering and terrorism. We see this as a 
moral imperative with long-lasting effects in 
governance and institution building, but this is also as 
an opportunity to assure investors that no hidden costs 
will have to be added and their calculations will not be 
clouded by graft and abuse.  
 
Good Governance   
 
39. For we believe that Good Governance is not a point of 
view, nor a state of being, nor a magic formula.   
 
40. Good Governance is the result of democracy: 
combating corruption while respecting human rights 
for all Nicaraguans at home and abroad; it is the result 
of resolving our disputes with our neighbors without 
the use of force or the threat of use of force; it is the 
result of upholding freedom of the press and freedom 
of expression while recognizing that the limits to our 
own rights start where we meet the rights of our 
neighbors.   
 
41. For that reason, my Government has presented the 
Governments of Central America a proposal to find a 
reasonable regional balance of defence forces while 
reducing dangerous weapons. The other presidents 
have responded positively and the armies and other 
experts are working out the details in a task that has 
been presented to them to be completed by December 
of 2004.   
 
42. We are a reliable partner in the fight against terrorism. 
Nicaragua was an early participant in the “Coalition of 
the Willing” because we could not stand idle in the 
face of grave violations of human rights.   
 
43. We have a small number of doctors, nurses and 
minesweepers doing humanitarian work with the 
Spanish brigade in Iraq, as we have been in the past
5 
recipients of vast amounts of humanitarian 
assistance in response to our needs.   
 
44. Summing up, Good Governance is the result of 
a Government doing the right things in the 
political arena.  
 
45. In order to better put into perspective the 
situation in Nicaragua let me quote what the 
Senate Appropriations Committee has to say 
about the new Nicaragua under my leadership: 
“The Committee believes that President Enrique 
Bolaños of Nicaragua deserves strong support 
for launching a courageous anti-corruption 
campaign, including issuing indictments against 
the former President, several of his closest 
relatives and associates and many high ranking 
former government officials. (…) The 
Committee requests USAID and the State 
Department to review United States assistance 
programs for Nicaragua with a view toward 
more substantially and effectively addressing 
her urgent needs, and to consult with the 
Committee as it prepares its fiscal year 2005 
budget request for Nicaragua.”   
Conclusion     
 
46. Eyes are normally cast at the Latin problems such as 
Governance in Venezuela, inequality in Brazil, lack of 
Growth in Argentina, etc. Very little of that very little 
said about Latin America is said about Central 
America. The new technology would put it bluntly: 
what you get about us, is nano-information.   
 
47. To add to that nano-information about facts on 
Nicaragua, I would like to sum it up by saying  
 
 
that even fewer people realize that Managua is the 
safest capital city in the Americas; that our inflation 
rate has been in single digits for a score, that we have 
signed a three year agreement with the IMF for 
stability and growth, and that our Aids infection level 
is one tenth that of the US.   
 
48. God Bless Houston, God Bless Texas, God Bless the 
people of the United States, God Bless Nicaragua. 
 
2403 palabras
