1 
PALABRAS DEL PRESIDENTE DE LA REPUBLICA 
INGENIERO ENRIQUE BOLAÑOS GEYER  
EN LA CENA DE GALA DEL CARIBEAN LATIN AMERICAN ACTION . 
Miami, Florida, 4 de diciembre de 2002 (1982 PALABRAS) 
 
 
1. In April 2001, President George W. Bush publicly 
unveiled his “Third Border” initiative designed to 
enhance diplomatic, economic, health, education 
and law enforcement cooperation and 
collaboration with the islands of the Caribbean. 
Caribbean/Latin American Action, our host for 
this important conference, has wholeheartedly  
embraced this concept and expanded it to 
encompass the entire Caribbean Basin region, 
including the countries of Central America. 
 
2. In the aftermath of September 11th, the geographic 
proximity of the Caribbean Basin to the U.S. has 
become even more relevan t in terms of the United 
States’ national security and strategic interests.  
 
3. In this new geopolitical reality, Nicaragua emerges 
as an oasis of peace.  The Nicaragua that was 
synonymous with violence, no longer exists.  
According to a study by the Inter -American  
Institute on Human Rights, the conclusion is clear: 
Nicaragua is the safest country in Central America 
and one of the safest in the world. 
 
4. The study states, “When we compare the Latin 
American capitals, Managua is the most secure.  
Nicaragua is t he most secure country in Central 
America and one of the most secure countries in 
the world.”  Public safety, dear friends, is one of 
the main attractions for foreign investors, when 
choosing a country for their business enterprises.  
!That country is Nicaragua! 
 
5. In addition to public safety, our country has other 
attractive and important elements to offer, some of 
which have been widely recognized and supported 
by the international community.  
 
6. You may find what I share with you tonight about 
Nicaragua to be somewhat biased.  However, you 
may be surprised by what former president George 
Bush recently stated, “Nicaragua: One of the best 
examples I know of a country that has chosen 
Democracy, free markets, and economic freedom. 
This nation has become one of t he most exiting 
countries for investment opportunities with the 
recent election of the current President, Enrique 
Bolaños, who stands for anti -corruption and 
economic stability, and enjoys a reputation for 
integrity and actions that support Democracy. 
Free markets, trade, and new business 
investments are being well received by 
Nicaraguans as well as representatives and 
visitors from other countries around the world. 
 
7. More investors are coming everyday to get 
involved in this economic transformation. 
Nicaragua is an exciting place these days and 
has become a beacon of success for others to 
follow. Together we can share in this economic 
growth and be a real part of this success story”. 
 
 
8. We know that in order to reach our objectives and 
benefit from our advant ageous and privileged 
geographic position, we will need to work hard to 
attract foreign investment.  To complement this 
effort, we have recently created a new investment 
promotion agency: PRO -NICARAGUA, which 
has the support of our business community and 
international organizations , and will serve as a 
facilitator to all investors interested in doing 
business in our country.  We have also begun a 
process of administrative reform to ease the path 
for investors in our country.
2 
9. Furthermore, as a result of t he responsible manner 
in which we have managed our finances and the 
actions taken in our relationships with 
international finance organizations, we have 
gained the recognition of the International 
Monetary Fund.  This has led us to the 
development of a monetary strategy that allows for 
unrestricted currency exchange, and full  
repatriation of investors´ profits and investment 
capital, while maintaining inflation under 5%. 
 
10. Thanks to these efforts, Nicaragua has also gained 
the recognition of investors in a key sector: textile 
and apparel.  In the last 10 years, exports from 
Nicaragua's free trade zones grew from a mere 
US$2.0 million up to nearly US$350 million; this 
represents an average annual growth rate of over 
60%.  The accelerated rate of expansion of our 
textile and apparel industry is clear evidence of the 
many advantages Nicaragua offers investors, such 
as our highly competitive labor force, low turnover 
and absenteeism, and the many tax and legal 
incentives we provide for investing in free trade 
zones. 
 
11. As I was saying, Nicaragua is now a safe nation 
and an important element in preserving safety, 
liberty, and democracy in our hemisphere. We 
believe that the United States is well served by 
having politically stable and economically sound 
countries alo ng its borders. We also believe that 
the United States is ready to help these countries if 
they are ready to help themselves, and there has 
never been a better opportunity to solidify the 
mutually beneficial relationship between the 
United States and the countries of the Caribbean 
Basin. 
 
12. How important is the economy of our region to the 
United States?  I would guess that only a few of 
you know that commerce between the United 
States and Central America is greater than that of 
the United States with Russia,  Indonesia and India 
combined. 
 
13. Defining the entire Caribbean Basin as the “Third 
Border” of the United States, with Canada and 
Mexico as the “first” and “second” borders simply 
recognizes the reality of its geographic location. 
The people living in the region are close enough to 
be able to walk or take a boat ride to the U.S.  
If the circumstances in their home country do not 
offer the hope of a better future for their children. 
This is the essence of the many challenges our 
neighborhood is faced with today . How do we 
create an environment that will allow the people of 
the region to believe in their future, to commit to 
their future, to sacrifice for their future?  
 
14. Our thesis is straightforward. Alone, these 
countries will not be able to escape their 
circumstances. First, they must come together as a  
region and second, they must forge a closer 
relationship with their neighbor to the north.  
 
15. The “Third Border” provides the many small 
economies that make up the region with a common 
conceptual framework and a  very real competitive 
advantage.  This concept will help us deal with the 
harsh realities of increased competition in the 
global economy and endemic poverty in many of 
our countries. We submit that the United States’ 
invitation to enter into a Free Trade Agreement 
with Central America ahead of other more 
developed markets such as Australia, South Africa 
or Morocco, is, a clear indication of the geo -
political importance of the region.  
 
16. This has become more pertinent in light of the 
difficult political situ ation facing many South 
American countries. The relative political and 
economic stability of Central America serves only 
to highlight the impact we can have there.  
 
17. We believe that a successful negotiation of the 
US-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) is a crucial first step in establishing the 
long-term stability and security of the entire 
region. We also believe that CAFTA, in and of 
itself, will not be sufficient in driving forward the 
processes of development – of reform, 
liberalization and integration —that are currently 
underway in the region. 
 
18. Our economic development is primarily dependent 
upon the ability to consistently attract foreign 
investment. Traditional sources of finance for 
development - domestic savings, government aid, 
multilateral agencies’ assistance and commercial 
bank lending —have fallen short and there is no 
reasonable expectation that this will change 
anytime soon.
3 
So far, Foreign Investment has not come to the 
region in sufficient quantities due to three 
fundamental reasons: 
 
19. The first is scale-- markets are small and 
inefficient. Second, disorder -- it is difficult to do 
business because of entrenched bureaucracy and 
the “culture of the seal” And third, corruption-- 
which creates a lack of predictability and an 
uneven pla ying field.  As you know, my 
government is committed to overcoming these 
barriers. 
 
20. Accelerating the pace of transformation to 
aggressively address these issues in Central 
America is the key to attracting the foreign 
investment needed for economic developm ent. 
Access to the largest market in the world provides 
a powerful incentive to the business and political 
leaders of Central America to come together and 
create a greater sense of urgency in meeting these 
challenges head-on.  
 
21. My friends, the harsh realit ies of poverty and 
globalization will not go away . In order to be 
successful in our efforts, the private sector must 
take greater initiative in forging the public -private 
sector partnership required to confront these 
obstacles. Globalization can be an enab ling and 
powerfully liberating force if properly harnessed. 
Poverty can only be alleviated if we embrace these 
forces and make them our own. 
 
22. In support of this position, I would like to share 
with you our recent experience with a Central 
American investment forum that CLAA organized 
last month in Managua, Nicaragua in collaboration 
with the U.S. Department of Commerce.  
 
23. The theme of this meeting was Compromiso 
CentroAmérica, Central American Commitment. 
More than three hundred leaders from the region 
and the United States came together in an 
extraordinary spirit of collaboration to discuss 
meaningful ways to accelerate the process of 
development in Central America . I want to share 
with you some important lessons that we drew 
from the dynamic discussions th at took place in 
Managua. 
 
24. First and foremost, there was a clear understanding 
that foreign investment, a necessary pre -requisite 
for economic development, will not come to the 
region unless we address the issues of small 
markets, difficult business practi ces and lack of 
predictability.  Not surprisingly, the most common 
theme in all of the workshops was the need for a 
uniform legal and regulatory framework across the 
region to insure that a well -defined set of values 
and rules is applied equally and impart ially to all 
parties. This is an urgent first step in confronting 
the powerful twin threats of endemic poverty and 
global competition. 
 
25. Overcoming these forces is the most serious 
challenge facing the region and must be addressed 
with a greater sense of ur gency. To move this 
process forward, US/Central American 
negotiations for the conclusion of a comprehensive 
and high-standard trade and investment agreement 
are critical. In addition, we must recognize the 
important role of the private sector.  
 
26. Without the unwavering commitment of the 
private sector, the economic, political, legal and 
social transformation that is needed to bring about 
fundamental change in Central America will not 
be possible. The forces of globalization have 
taught us that isolation is inimical to the region’s 
prosperity. Thus, the question is no longer how to 
protect industries from competition, but how to 
make industrial production competitive in the 
global market. 
 
27. Dear friends: Nicaragua is ready to join forces 
with its neighbors in t he region to meet these 
challenges.   
 
28. Nicaragua’s vast natural resources, men and 
women with a great desire to work and succeed, a 
large pool of young US -educated and bilingual 
managers, an atmosphere of absolute public safety, 
transparency and responsibl e management of 
public funds, and an enormous potential for 
economic development make our nation an 
attractive destination for investment.   
 
29. Nicaragua is a land of new opportunities!  I invite 
you to focus your attention on this nation, which is 
now on the right path towards progress and 
development.
4 
 
30. Nicaragua and the rest of Central America await 
you with open arms and wish to welcome you to 
the many benefits and advantages we offer, some 
of which I have shared briefly with you tonight. 
 
31. Our world-famous poet, Rubén Dario, also known 
as “Prince of the Spanish Language and Father of 
Modern Literature” once said, “ Si la patria es  
pequeña, uno grande la sueña”  which translated 
loosely means, “even if our nation is small, one 
dreams of her as great .” One hundred years ago, 
the world embraced Dario’s work, and his words 
inspired an entire movement in modern literature.  
I hope that you too, might embrace them and that 
together, we may build a brighter, more 
prosperous future for Nicaragua and the Central 
American region. 
 
32. I would like to thank Caribbean Latin American 
Action for allowing me to share these ideas with 
you tonight, and on behalf of my government and 
the people of Nicaragua, I would like to thank all 
of you for your participation this evening.  
 
33. Thank you very much.  May God bless you.
