Discurso del Presidente de la República en Visita a Bolsa de Nueva York NYSE  
PROSPECTS OF THE CHILEAN ECONOMY 
New York Stock Exchange, September 7, 2000 
 
Performance during the nineties 
 
The Chilean economy exhibited a very strong performance over most of the 90s, with 
real GDP growth averaging 7.8 percent between 1990 and 1997, and inflation declining 
gradually from 27 percent to 6 percent during the same period.  
 
In this excellent environment social indicators improved substantially, with the poverty 
indexes being the chief example. Indeed, population behind the poverty line dropped 
from 45% in 1987 to less than 22% in 1998. The speed of decline in this indicator is 
considered record high and comparable to what has happened in China. There are two 
main explanations for this achievement: a strong macroeconomic performance and an 
effective and well focused social policy.  
 
The macroeconomic performance has several important roots. During the last decades 
structural reforms were made in Chile, including an increasingly open trade regime, a 
strong banking supervision mechanism, and prudent macroeconomic policies. In 
particular, on the fiscal side, the strong position of the public finances has helped to 
achieve stability within a rapid growth path. On the monetary side, a modern and 
independent central bank has certainly contributed to the substantial reduction of 
inflation and the adequate macroeconomic maneuvering. 
 
 
 
 
The impact of the recent crisis 
 
By the end of 1997, and as a consequence of the crisis first experienced by the Asian 
countries, a substantial change occurred in the international markets conditions. This 
new environment resulted in a reduction in the availability of capital flows for emerging 
countries and a sharp decrease in their terms of trade. In the case of Chile, terms of trade 
dropped by 12.5% in 1998, one of the largest declines in Latin America. 
 
The plunge of terms of trade, together with an expansive economic cycle in Chile 
during 1997 led by overheated domestic demand, explain the significant widening of the 
current account deficit observed towards 1998. This situation, combined with declining 
capital inflows, increased pressures against our currency. 
 
In response to these pressures, and in order to prevent a large and disorderly 
depreciation, monetary policy was tightened significantly in 1998, while public 
expenditure was reduced below budgeted levels. As a result, demand experienced a 
sharp contraction, while the current account deficit was increased. It would be fair to 
say that the economic contraction observed between the end of 1998 and during the first 
three quarters of 1999 was stronger than expected. The unemployment rate reached a 
peak of 11.5% in mid-1999. Despite these facts, it is also important to say that Chile 
maintained a better performance than the region average.
During the first half of 1999, once pressures eased and the current account deficit was 
under control, economic policy became more expansionary. This change, together with 
an improvement of the international situation, produced a rapid recovery of GDP and 
employment levels during the last quarter of 1999. Meanwhile, inflation continued 
declining and exports started to grow strongly following world recovery and the real 
exchange depreciation that accumulated during 1998-1999.  
 
Forecast for 2000 
 
The recovery of economic activity began decidedly in the fourth quarter of 1999 with a 
rate of growth of 3.9%. During the first semester of the year GDP growth reached 5.8%, 
mainly due to a dynamic external demand. The key issue in this regard is that the 
economy has optimal conditions to initiate a new phase of growth based on healthy 
fundamentals.  
 
Indeed, many indicators show the strength of the Chilean economic situation and 
perspectives, among them a solid external position. In this matter, robust activity growth 
of our trading partners and the world as a whole has increased commodities prices and 
our export sector continues to grow rapidly. Despite imports had shown an important 
recovery, the current account deficit for the moving year that ends in June 2000 reached 
only 1.0% of GDP. It is expected that this figure will be less than 2.0% for the year 
2000, a sound figure in tune with the fundamentals of the Chilean economy. 
 
On the fiscal side, budget figures show a clear improvement during the first semester. 
The budget deficit moved from a deficit of 1.5% of GDP to a surplus of 0.2% of GDP in 
the year that ends in June 2000. These figures show that my government commitment 
with sound and solid fiscal accounts is strong and clear. It is quite clear for us that in 
order to maintain a stable growth path it is very important to maintain a strong fiscal 
position. Let me remind you how solid this position is: Public debt is below 10% of 
GDP. 
 
The indicators I have already mentioned, together with others such as growth 
perspectives, lack of misalignment of the real exchange rate, availability of foreign 
exchange reserves, among others have made Chile to appear as the most stable 
economy—having the lowest risk level—among emerging countrie s. 
 
We are convinced that the Chilean economy has all the conditions to start a new phase 
of high growth. However, consumption and investment have reacted somehow slower 
than expected during the last few months. Lack of liquidity in international markets, a 
composition of growth less labor intensive than predicted, as well as stronger a long 
lasting effects of the recession in terms of debt overhang, have contributed to a less 
dynamic domestic demand. The monetary and fiscal authorities have agreed on the idea 
that the economy needed a further impulse and announced last week a decline of interest 
rates and several measures to foster both consumption and investment growth.  
 
It should be noticed, however, that GDP growth in our country is still strong. We expect 
GDP to grow between 5.5 and 6.0% during this year and above 6.0% during 2001. This 
performance is salient when compared to other Latin American countries. Market 
forecasts show that Chile and Mexico will have the higher growth rates in the region
Perspectives 2001-2006 
 
After the economic troubles we faced during the last two years -problems by the way 
that we have certainly overcome- I can affirm that our country has remarkably solid 
basis to start a new virtuous-circle that will render growth and welfare.  
 
My Government is committed to play a crucial role in sustaining and boosting economic 
growth. During the last decades we have learned that macroeconomic stability is a key 
precondition for stability and growth. Investment and individual initiative develops 
faster when agents are able to foresee opportunities and risks are under control. By 
achieving serious and responsible macroeconomic management we hope to reach this 
goal. And in Chile we have excellent institutions to execute economic policy.  
 
Fiscal policy 
 
One extremely relevant instrument to achieve a stable economy is a balanced and 
trustworthy fiscal policy. There are too many experiences in which what appears to be 
an output gain led by an irresponsible fiscal impulse, is at the end short lived and ends 
up in long run losses. The Chilean Government has committed itself to achieve a 
structural fiscal surplus of 1% of GDP, starting on 2001.  
 
There are good reasons for countries like Chile to maintain a small fiscal surplus. First, 
a solid public finance position decreases vulnerability to international liquidity shocks. 
Second, countries like Chile, with a non-renewable resource as the main export product, 
should save part of the revenues for future generations. This is a matter of inter-
temporal justice and equity. And last, but not least, an economy that needs to promote 
and encourage exports as the main growth source, needs a competitive real exchange 
rate, and a fiscal surplus is key ingredient to support it.  
 
Economic policy in general, and fiscal policy in particular, are taking decisive steps 
towards a more transparent policy scheme. For example, in August 2000 the Minister of 
Finance, together with the Governor of the Central Bank, allowed the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) to publish their annual report on the Chilean economy. This 
assessment, classified until now, let the public obtain an external, independent and 
expert opinion about the economic outcome and the policy applied in our country. Chile 
is one of the first emerging countries to publish this report. 
 
 
Monetary policy 
 
Our sound macroeconomic performance is due, to a great extent, to the independence of 
our Central Bank—a legal arrangement that has proven to be  efficient in many 
countries. This institution has been autonomous for more than 10 years and has 
conducted monetary policy in a responsible manner. In a coordinated way with the 
fiscal authority, inflation has declined to industrialized country levels.  
 
In line with this inflation achievement, the Central Bank has announced a 2-4% 
inflation target for 2001 onwards. Moreover, it has completed its inflation targeting 
framework with the publication of a monetary policy report very much in line with the
reports published by the Central Banks of OECD countries such as Australia, Sweden, 
and the UK. This report is a thorough analysis of the current macroeconomic situation 
that allows the private sector to take better informed decisions, lower risks and, more 
generally, improve the allocation of resources in the economy. 
 
 
Financial development 
 
Financial development has proved to cause growth. An improved resource allocation, as 
well as better risk-sharing arrangements, are important by-products of a deep financial 
sector. Of course, if it is ill-regulated, financial development could cause more problems 
than benefits. 
 
Chile’s financial sector is increasingly developed. Moreover, regulation and supervision 
is efficient and up to date. In fact, despite the recession, commercial banks continue to 
be among the strongest within developing countries. Both stock market capitalization 
and credit over GDP figures demonstrate that our capital market is one of the most 
developed among emerging economies. Of course, our economy is not large, but there 
are several domestic markets in which financial transactions are highly sophisticated. A 
simple example should suffice: A family can get a 30-year mortgage in Chile to buy a 
house. 
 
Financial integration is also important for our economy as means to absorb terms of 
trade shocks. A small export-oriented economy such as Chile is highly dependent on the 
international environment. External shocks are transmitted mainly through sharp 
fluctuations of commodity prices (although, sometimes, through violent changes in 
external financing conditions). A well functioning and integrated financial system is an 
extremely useful vehicle through which a country is able to limit the effect of these 
shocks. 
 
But, in order to obtain these benefits, the sole liberalization of capital account 
restrictions is not enough. A country also needs adequate safeguards such as transparent 
accounting codes, professional risks management, a solid banking regulation, and, 
obviously, a consistent macroeconomic policy. Chile has been recognized for having 
these characteristics. 
 
Our economy is increasingly open both financially and in trade. At the same time, 
however, we are modernizing further our financial sector to take full advantage of this 
integration. 
 
Perhaps a good example of what I am saying is the government effort of modernizing 
minority share-holder protection in Chile. We will soon have congress approval for a 
new tender offer law that includes state-of-the-art corporate governance. This new law 
will put Chile at the front among emerging markets and will deepen further our market.  
 
World’s evidence clearly suggests that there is a direct relationship between adequate 
rules and capital market development. In fact, it has been clearly proved that countries 
with a higher degree of minority shareholder protection succeed in having a profound 
capital market that enhances economic development. On the other hand, weak corporate 
governance is related to vulnerability in the economy. Our legislation is geared towards
high protection of foreign investors because we are certain that external financing is a 
fundamental component of our development. 
Conclusion 
 
To conclude, let me remark that the Chilean economy has had an impressive 
performance during the last 15 years. In fact, its has been used as an example 
extensively around the world.  
 
But that is past. What I have told you is future. My government is committed to 
continue this successful path. Macroeconomic policy in Chile has even a better design 
than in the past, institutions are modern and economic policy decisions will continue to 
be taken in a responsible manner. We are sure Chile will continue to be an example for 
emerging economies. 
 
Thank you very much.
