Discurso del Presidente de la República en Almuerzo ofrecido por el Australian Latin 
American Business Council (inglés) 
Australian-Latin American Business Council, Sydney, Australia 
 
July 15, 2005 
 
Thank you very much, and thank you very much to the acting Prime Minister for your 
kind remarks. I am extremely happy to be here this afternoon, to spend time with you, 
the Australian-Latin American Business Council, and everyone in this large audience. 
 
I would like to talk a little bit about Chile, a bit about Australia, and why we’re here 
with such a large delegation of members of our own business community, some 
members of my cabinet and other senior officials. These people represent the new Chile, 
which is trying to open up its borders to find a place in this global world. In the case of 
Chile, we are first and foremost an extremely stable country. For the first time in our 
history as a country, all of us have a sense of purpose of how to work together in this 
21st century. 
 
We are a rather isolated country; Chile and Australia used to be in the corners of any 
world map, as I said yesterday. Europe and the Atlantic Ocean were in the middle of 
that map. But history has changed, and now the Pacific Ocean has come to be the 
center. For the first time, therefore, Chile and Australia are sitting in the front row of 
this new scenario. We are surrounded by the Andes Mountains to the east, the desert to 
the north, Antarctica to the south and a great ocean to the west. We used to consider 
ourselves an island of sorts within Latin America. And you, of course, are an island as 
well—a continent-island. 
 
Although that can generate a sense of being an outsider, we have discovered that in the 
21st century, we have to engage in the rules of the game. First: how can we achieve 
some kind of development in our countries? We have learned the hard way that in 
today’s world, you have to be a democratic country with respect for human rights, 
which is what you have achieved in Australia. Second, you learned the hard way to run 
the economy in order for economic policy to cease to be left-wing or right-wing. Certain 
macroeconomic policies need to be taken into account no matter where you are. 
Therefore, in Chile we have a sound fiscal policy. I introduced a structural surplus into 
the budget of 1% of the gross domestic product, which means that we must have a 
surplus, no matter what the price of copper, potential growth of the GNP, or oil prices. 
When copper was down, we were thus able to spend more than we would ordinarily 
have been able to spend. We spent as if the copper price were 90 cents per pound. 
Today, though, it costs a dollar and a half per pound, so we can spend more. We were 
the only Latin American country to have a countercyclical economic policy, thanks to 
this simple rule. And more importantly, international markets paid attention, so now 
Chile’s international credit rating is the highest among the world’s emerging markets. 
 
We also have an autonomous monetary policy, low tariff barriers—just 6% on 
average—and a low interest rate of just over 2%. We ha ve an extremely open economy. 
Imports and exports represent 65% of our GDP. If we add services linked to foreign 
countries, that number increases to 80%. Because we are an open economy, we need 
international free trade agreements with different parts of the world. Today we have 
trade agreements with the European Union, the European Free Trade Association, the
United States, Canada, Mexico, most Latin American countries, here in Asia we have 
one with South Korea, and we just finished negotiations on the so-called P-4, with New 
Zealand, Singapore and Brunei. We are in the midst of free trade negotiations with 
China, and we will begin negotiations with Japan at the next APEC meeting in South 
Korea in November.  
 
Once you are so open, you have to define your goals. We think of ourselves as a country 
that has a chance to serve as a bridge between Asia, Australia, New Zealand, and the 
other Latin American countries. This is why we have been pushing so hard for an air 
link between our country and yours. Before, you had to do through Tahiti, Los Angeles, 
or Europe. But in order for us to be a bridge, we need to have a sound financial system, 
a well-qualified labor force, and a very good telecommunications infrastructure, all of 
which we have. We also need an agenda for the next few decades in three major areas: 
first, a digital agenda, where the government and the private sector push to prevent a 
digital divide between technology haves and have-nots. In Chile, more than 90% of the 
services provided by the internal tax service can be accessed via the Internet. Five years 
ago, small- and medium-sized companies had very little Internet access, but now they 
have broadband, and can access a variety of e-Government services—not only income 
tax, but others as well. We are the first Latin American country to develop this area.  
 
Second is our innovation, research and development agenda. We are exporting many 
goods, but in the next decades, we’re not only going to export apples, oranges and 
peaches; we will be exporting genetically-modified foods that only resemble those 
fruits. If you want to be on the cutting edge of this area, you have to develop your own 
research. In the case of salmon, we feed different foods to the fish depending on 
whether they are headed for Japan or the United States, because each country has 
different tastes. Currently, we are exporting, but in the near future, we will have more 
intricate products, protected by patents. So we need to invest in biotechnology. We have 
come here to learn about what you’re doing in these areas, and propose cooperative 
initiatives.  
 
Along with our digital agenda, and research and development, we need energy 
infrastructure. Given the growth rate of Chile over the past 15 years, we have to double 
our energy production every eight years. This is why even though in the past most of 
our energy—70%--came from hydroelectric power, we have begu n to import natural gas 
from Argentina. And now, with the issues we have had with the energy supply from 
them, we’ve decided to create our own energy plan in Chile to buy gas abroad. This is 
one of the things I spoke to the Prime Minister about. We are also considering the idea 
of nuclear energy, and I have set up a Presidential commission to that effect. I know that 
this is a very sensitive subject everywhere, not just in Chile, but in our case it’s essential 
to make sure that we remain our autonomy in terms of energy.  
 
If all of these things work out, if Chile can serve as a springboard for Asian investment 
in Latin America, or if Chile can use Australia as a springboard for investment in Asia, 
we should explore this. In order to achieve it, we are making a number of double-
taxation agreements. We hope to start negotiations on double-taxation with our 
Australian friends this December, and this was yet another issue that I discussed with 
Prime Minister John Howard today. If we are able to relate to each other in a closer 
way, cooperation between the private sectors of our countries can be multiplied.
Meanwhile, I think that this is the only way to understand how to define our 
development. Many historians used to think that development had mostly to do with 
ports and oceans. After World War II, it was the North Atlantic Ocean where most of 
the world’s trade took place. Trade growth among the United States, Canada and 
Europe in the 50s, 60s and 70s was where the growth in the global economy was 
concentrated.  
 
What country will have the facilities—not just infrast ructure or financial services or 
roads, but rather human capital and know-how—to be able to trade with those around 
them in this region? When I define what we think about for Chile in the long run, we 
plan to remain a stable, open country that participates in the globalized world at the 
same time. Despite the elections coming up in Chile, which will occur as they would in 
any other democratic country, the major components of this model are not going to 
change. This doesn’t mean that our work to create a more open economy, with sound 
economic policies that combine growth with public policy related to education, 
healthcare and housing, will be ending.  
 
However, our sense is that we are discovering something: history shows that people 
have always done what we happen to be doing before we do it. We all know that in the 
19th century, Chile and Australia were rich in energy. We had shipping, and Australia 
had coal. Before the Panama Canal was built, you had to go by the south of Chile, via 
Cape Horn, to get from Australia to the United Kingdom. And many of those ships had 
a wide variety of goods on board, leading to exchange. In the 19th century, we 
discovered that the ocean was a bridge, and where before you send us coal, now maybe 
you can send gas, and in exchange we can send you something else.  
 
But more importantly, you have the know-how to remain competitive, to stay on the 
cutting edge of biotechnology, to remain an open country. We can learn from what you 
can teach us. Perhaps we can tell you a few things about doing business with other Latin 
American countries. 
 
Finally, I would like to say to you that there is going to be a Presidential election in 
Chile next December. No matter what the outcome of that is—although, of course, I 
have my preferences—the next government will retain the  same approach that mine has. 
There will be some changes, of course, but the important thing is that the ship is going 
in the right direction. The Chilean ship is headed in the right direction, and to keep 
doing so, we would like to sail with our Australian friends. 
 
Thank you.
