
CONFERENCE AT THE HARVARD JOHN F. KENNEDY SCHOOL OF GOVERNMENT
Cambridge, April 9, 2014

«Development as a Political Process: the Ecuadorian Dream»

First I would like to express my profound gratitude to Harvard University – its officers, professors, and students – for this invitation. 
(También desde Ecuador nos están siguiendo centenas de jóvenes en algunas universidades ecuatorianas a través de internet y de video, así que un saludo a los jóvenes estudiantes ecuatorianos)…
As you may know, before entering politics, I was a university professor. Moreover, I had the opportunity to earn a master’s in economics and a Ph.D., also in economics, at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, during four of the happiest years of my life. 
That is why returning to academia renews my spirit, particularly as the differences between academic life and political life are so great. Whereas in academia it is a sin not to tell the truth, in politics it is practically a sin to be truthful. 
In academic life you find simplicity; veneration for the truth; and usually the best of human nature. It would not normally occur to anyone in academia to intentionally lie. In politics, although there are also many good people who seek to serve, unfortunately all too often you still encounter the worst of human nature. 
So thank you, for offering me this opportunity to return to academia.
Allow me to tell you about a fascinating country, the most compact mega-diverse country in the world. If we consider both terrestrial and marine biodiversity, Ecuador has the largest number of species on the planet in a territory just over ninety nine thousand (99.000) square miles (about the size of the State of Nevada), where one finds all climates and microclimates imaginable. You just have seen a video promoting Ecuador. In Ecuador we have “four worlds.” In a single day a tourist can have breakfast along the beaches of the Pacific with fresh seafood, then have lunch at the foot of Cayambe, a majestic Andean mountain, snow-covered year-round, right on the equator this snow cove, and finally have dinner deep in the Amazon jungle. The next day, after a flight lasting less than two hours, our tourist, amazed, can be in the Galápagos Islands, one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World. 
Ecuador loves life. Our Constitution is the first in the world to grant rights to nature. Twenty percent of our territory is protected in forty-nine Reserves and National Parks, among them Yasuní Park, a jungle treasure and a world biosphere reserve, where in just one-third of a square mile you can find a greater variety of trees than in all of North America. 
No doubt, given its diversity and geographic location, Ecuador is the eco-center of the world. In Ecuador, in seven days you can sample all of Latin America: its beaches, its mountains, its jungles, its islands, and, most important, its people. 
The Argentinians, very proudly proclaim: “The Pope is Argentinian”; my dear friend Dilma Rousseff, the President of Brazil – Argentina’s eternal rival in soccer – says “Well, the Pope may be Argentinian, but God is Brazilian”…. In Ecuador we do not have any problem with that: certainly the Pope is Argentinian, God is probably Brazilian, but Paradise… is Ecuadorian! You are always welcome in Ecuador!
Dear friends:
According to the 2012 United Nations Human Development Report, during the 2007-2012 period, which coincides with our administration, Ecuador is one of the three countries in the world that advanced the most in terms of human development, improving its ranking from “medium” human development to “high” human development. 
Poverty in Latin America is not the result of scarce resources, but of inequality, a consequence of perverse power relationships where only a few have dominated everything. By changing these power relationships in the service of the large majority, through profoundly democratic processes, we have succeeded, in our seven years in office, in becoming the leader in Latin America in reducing inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient, by 8 points. This reduction is four times greater than the average for Latin America, one of the few regions of the world where inequality is decreasing. 
We are also one of the three Latin American countries that have achieved the greatest reduction in poverty. In the period from 2006 to 2013, poverty has fallen from 37.6 percent to 25.6 percent and for the first time in history extreme poverty is below the double-digit level, falling from 16.9 percent to 8.6 percent.
Overcoming poverty is the moral imperative of humankind, not only because it is the greatest assault on human rights and freedoms, but also because today it is not the result of resource scarcity, but of exclusionary systems. 
Ecuador also boasts one of the most dynamic economies in Latin America as the Dean said, with an average growth rate of 4.2% for the 2007-2013 period. In contrast with orthodox economics, which calls for reducing wages and sacrificing labor rights to supposedly generate employment, we have increased wages, and currently we have the highest real wages in the Andean region. We have also ended precarious employment practices such as “tercerización” (-outsourcing-) which enable a company to hire its workers through a third company and thus avoid any of the usual responsibilities of employers. For example, at a labor trial in 2007, the largest cement company of Ecuador declared that it had… no employees! 
During the long and dark period of neoliberal policies, in pursuit of competitiveness, our working class was sacrificed with falling real wages and mechanisms of labor exploitation euphemistically called “labor flexibility”, in countries that maintained high rates of unemployment and did not even have access to unemployment insurance. 
This intensified the gap between labor and capital income shares, which is one of the greatest sources of inequality in Latin America. For instance, in a developed and equitable country like Sweden, for every dollar generated, 35 cents are paid to capital and 65 cents to labor. However, in the case of Ecuador, the same dollar is distributed inversely: 35 cents to labor and 65 cents to capital. This has always been difficult to change because of the dilemma of having to choose between labor exploitation and unemployment.
In Ecuador we resolved this dilemma with creative and unprecedented measures. The traditional minimum wage has always existed in our laws, but we introduced another category: the decent wage, defined as the wage that allows a family to afford the basic cost of living with their total household income. With the new legislation, employers can pay the minimum wage to avoid a greater evil, that means unemployment, but no company can declare profits if it does not pay the decent wage to every single worker. Even though some had predicted terrible implications for the private sector, the effects of this measure have been impressive and have surpassed our expectations. Since it was implemented, in 2011, average wages began to rise, and this year, without any negative impact whatsoever, the minimum wage is already equivalent to the decent wage. For us, labor enjoys supremacy over capital, yet in contrast to classical socialism, which proposed abolishing private property, we use modern, and in some cases unique, instruments to eliminate tensions between capital and labor.
The great challenge facing humanity in the twenty-first century is to achieve the supremacy of human beings over capital, with societies dominating markets, not markets dominating societies. The market is a great servant, but it is a terrible master. We believe in societies with markets, but not societies overruled by the market, where lives, people, and society itself are treated as merely one more commodity, all in function to that entelechy called “market”. 
And we are very proud of the social gains we have achieved, such as ensuring equal opportunity to access higher education. For instance, Ecuador has the greatest number of poor people studying in universities in Latin America. This is as a result of the new Constitution, which establishes public higher education at no cost. We are also playing a leadership role regionally and internationally in integrating persons with disabilities into society. We have achieved nearly full employment among people with disabilities who are able to work.
At the outset of our administration, thanks to effective management and technical rigor, we were able to buy back a large part of our external debt at market value, that is, at about one-third of its nominal value. As a result of this successful repurchase, the external debt service was reduced from 24% of the national budget in 2006 to 5.3% in 2013.
We also renegotiated the oil contracts, known as “contratos de participación”, signed in the 1990s when the price of a barrel of oil was around sixteen dollars, from which the State received just 4 or 5 dollars per barrel. When the price of oil shot up, the oil companies started earning multimillion-dollar profits. 
Now we have “contratos de servicios” where the distribution is just the opposite: a fixed fee per barrel is paid to the oil company based on a reasonable rate of return, and the rest, no matter the market price, goes to the owner of the resources, the Ecuadorian people. 
As a result of efficiency gains in tax collection and efforts to fight tax evasion, tax revenues in Ecuador have tripled, despite some tax reductions and tax eliminations. The tax burden has increased from 15.5% of GDP in 2006 to 20.1% in 2013, meeting the Latin American average, but still far below the 31.1% average for the OECD countries. This has allowed us to achieve the highest level of public investment in Latin America, 15% of the GDP for 2013, while the outstanding public debt, as a percentage of GDP is barely 24%, far less than that of developed economies. 
Public investment has brought about major transformations in roadways, ports, airports, telecommunications, electrical power generation, the justice system, citizen security, and systemic competitiveness in general.
At the same time, the renegotiation of the external debt, the revised oil contracts, and the increase in taxes collected, have freed up considerable resources to pay the most important debt: the social debt. Whereas in 2006, 4.8 percent of GDP was earmarked to the social sector, in 2013 this figure has increased to 11.4% of GDP. In absolute values, 4.3 times more is invested in education than in 2006, and 4.5 times more in health. 
This is important: the distribution of resources reflects the power relationships within a society; and the data clearly shows, beyond any doubt, that if historically, the ones in charge in Ecuador were the creditors, the bankers, the international bureaucracies; today it is the Ecuadorian people who are in charge. 
And let’s talk about human rights. Ecuador is one of the only seven countries, of the 34 in the hemisphere, to have signed absolutely every inter-American human rights instrument. As in any State where rule of law prevails, crimes are prosecuted, not persons. Yet, precisely because finally we are all equal before the law, we face attacks from the historical powers that were always above the law. 
The logical consequence of these gains is the political stability Ecuador enjoys today. After the serious economic crisis of 1999, when biased policies and management led to the general failure of the banking system, the economy shrank by 7.6%, unemployment shot up to almost 15%, the national currency was eliminated and the dollar was adopted as the legal tender. As a result of the crisis, millions of Ecuadorians emigrated, destroying families and tearing up the social fabric. 
The instability was such that, up until 2007, no administration was able to complete a term; in 10 years, there were seven presidents. Ecuador was an example of everything that could go wrong with a country.
Today, Ecuador is one of the most stable democracies in Latin America. Since 2006, “la Revolución Ciudadana” (the name of our political project) has won 10 consecutive elections, including two presidential elections in the first round, which was unthinkable in Ecuador’s recent history. We have the highest public approval ratings across the continent as the Dean mentioned. According to the Mexican polling firm Mitofsky, which performs an annual evaluation of approval ratings of 20 presidents in the Americas, the Ecuadorian government is the only one that has consistently achieved outstanding ratings, with popular support of around 80%, despite having been in office for seven years. 
“Latinbarómetro”, a public opinion study conducted each year by a Chilean organization in 18 countries of Latin America, puts us in first place in the categories of satisfaction with life, long-term economic expectations, and support for democracy, as well as in fairness in the distribution of wealth and trust in the State. The report characterizes Ecuador as a success story.
As you can see, democracy has been firmly established in Ecuador; not only democracy in the formal sense but real democracy in terms of people’s access to rights, equal opportunities, and dignified living conditions. 
This is the so-called Ecuadorian miracle – even though there are no miracles in development. The impressive changes that have occurred in Ecuador have come as a result of a fundamental change in power relationships. 
Today, in Ecuador, despite all challenges we face, it is the Ecuadorian people who govern. Our greatest accomplishment is having overcome the hopelessness in which we found ourselves after the crisis in 1999, the result of neoliberal fundamentalism.
Queridos jóvenes, dear students:
They say that Christopher Columbus was the first economist; because he didn’t know where he was going, when he got there he didn’t know where he was, and everything was paid for by the government.
In any event, if he had been an economist or if an economist had accompanied him, he would have concluded that Latin America’s development would be more rapid than that of North America. While both regions have abundant natural resources, in the former there were already well-organized societies such as the Incas, Mayas, and Aztecs, and more advanced technologies.
This is one of the great enigmas of development. The reasons are many and complex, but no doubt one of the key reasons is the elite classes who dominated and continue to this day to dominate Latin America.
An interesting analysis of the effect of the domination of certain elites and the institutions they create for their own benefit was done by Daron Acemoglu, a professor at MIT, and James Robinson, a professor at Harvard, in their book Why Nations Fail. Their analysis, an accurate, albeit late, institutionalist and political economy approach, demonstrates that the institutions, policies, and programs of a country depend on who holds power. This had already been noted centuries earlier by the French thinker Frederic Bastiat: (I quote) “When plunder becomes a way of life for a group of men living together in society, they create for themselves in the course of time a legal system that authorizes it and a moral code that glorifies it.” (I end of quoting)
Dear friends, dear students:
Development is basically a political problem of who is in charge in a society: the elites or the vast majority, capital or human beings, the market or society. 
The greatest harm that has been done to Economics is to disassociate it from its original nature as Political Economy. We have been led to believe that everything is a technical issue, and, in not considering the power relationships within a society, we have been made subservient to the dominant powers. Paraphrasing the great economist John Kenneth Galbraith, the economist that doesn’t acknowledge questions of power is completely useless.
Based on an adequate and in-depth analysis of the Ecuadorian economic crisis of 1999, and beyond naïve technocratic interpretations, one concludes that it was the political power of the bankers, in collusion with the national and international bureaucracy associated with the financial sector, that destroyed the national currency and shifted the impact of the crisis to the State and to society as a whole. 
To that end, they did not hesitate to reduce controls on the financial system, drawing up a new constitution and legislation to suit their needs, and then tearing up that same constitution and laws when they no longer served their interests. 
The fundamental conclusion drawn from this should have been the need to free the State from the groups that were controlling it. However, the combination of ideologies, special interests, and incompetence, as well as the desire to believe in miracle cures, led the country to renounce its national currency and adopt the dollar as legal tender. 
As a result, Ecuador was left without a national currency of its own, but the power of the banks in the country’s economy and politics continued unabated. 
Another example is the renegotiation of the nation’s external debt in the midst of the crisis, which nominally reduced debt by 40.9 percent, exchanging it for new bonds. The truth is that there was no debt reduction, since a value much higher than the market value at the time of the renegotiation was imposed. In fact, the renegotiation was made at a similar market value to what the majority of bondholders had paid before the crisis. The market value during the crisis should have been the starting point of the renegotiation, as it was later in Argentina. 
Why then was the obvious not done? Simply because the renegotiation did not have the objective of minimizing the debt payments of a bankrupt country; the objective was to guarantee the highest returns to speculative financial capital. 
In fact, the Minister of Economy at the time presented the offer to renegotiate with the express argument that its objective was (I quote) “to provide the participants with a significant increase in the market value of the prices of their bonds.” (End quote)
In other words, in the worst crisis in the nation’s history our negotiators were worried about the creditors recovering the value of their bonds, instead of trying to resolve the external debt problem once and for all. 
As if all the advantages the creditors obtained from a ruined country were not enough, beginning in the year 2000 all economic policy was geared to ensuring that the bonds of Ecuador’s external debt be quoted at the highest possible value in the capital markets, thereby generating windfall profits for creditors and at the same time driving up the cost of a potential repurchase of the country’s debt. 
The centerpiece of this policy was the nefarious “Ley Orgánica de Responsabilidad, Estabilización y Transparencia Fiscal” imposed by the IMF in 2002, which created a Fund with a very long and complicated name: “Fondo de Estabilización, Inversión Social y Productiva y Reducción del Endeudamiento Público”, or FEIREP. This fund was to be financed mainly by state participation in the private production of oil to be transported by the new pipeline for heavy crude oil, whose inauguration was planned for the following year. 
In what has been perhaps the only situation of its kind in the world, 70% of these resources, by law, was earmarked for the repurchase of the public debt, the largest anticipated budgetary allocation in Ecuador’s history. 
All this artificially drove up the value of the Ecuadorian debt bonds, transferring huge resources to bond holders. In other words, while in other countries – as in the United States – sharing insider information that results in illicit gains for financial asset holders is a criminal offense, with the FEIREP, such activity was established as a national law in Ecuador. 
One can try to understand the FEIREP as promoting the “virtue of savings”. However, in order to do so, one must have the capacity to save, but in the case of Ecuador the opposite was true: there was a need for financing. The situation was so absurd that while the country sent hundreds of millions of dollars from the FEIREP abroad, yielding approximately 2% interest annually, at the same time, it had to borrow at rates greater than 8% annually.
It should be noted that, as Minister of Economy and Finance of the Republic of Ecuador in 2005, I had the great honor of leading the successful effort to have the National Congress repeal that infamy called the FEIREP.
Public spending, because of these “fiscal responsibility” laws, could not grow beyond 3.5% annually in real terms, except for the debt service. In other words, if Bill Gates had come along and told us, “I will give you ten billion dollars to invest in health, education, etc.,” we would not have been able to accept the offer as we would have been breaking the “law”.
What was the political economy behind these laws? That any surplus should be used to pay the external debt and the ideological fundamentalism that any investment should be made only by the private sector. 
Historically Latin America has been dominated by elites who have excluded the large majority from the benefits of progress, and with their shortsighted attitudes even hindered greater progress for themselves. 
Today, at the world level, we are dominated by the interests of big capital, what I call “the empire of capital,” especially the financial one. 
The lack of regulation and supervision, as well as the extreme greed in the international financial system, mainly in the United States, resulted in one of the greatest economic and political crises of recent years. The investment banks were allowed to grow unchecked until they became “too big to fail”.
At that point, the rhetoric of non-State intervention was over.
The crisis meant a reduction in the value of the assets of the middle class, mainly their houses, but paradoxically, the fortunes of the wealthiest, and the financial profits of banks, are now at record levels, while family incomes have barely recovered their pre-crisis value.
That is also at the root of the European crisis: everything is at the service of capital, especially financial capital. With the complicity of supposed economic science and of the international financial bureaucracies, ideology is disguised as science, the “Theo-classical economy.”
They repeat outdated recipes of austerity, against human beings and in favor of capital.
These policies are called “Hooverian” in reference to U.S. President Herbert Hoover, who at the beginning of the Great Depression of the 1930s in the United States deepened the crisis with measures of this sort. 
Why don’t they do the obvious? Why do they keep the worst of the worst? Because the problem is not technical, but political. The problem is one of relationships of power. The solution to the crisis involves citizens retaking control over capital, and society regaining control of the market. 
Dear students, professors, friends:
The problem with development is that there are many necessary conditions, but none in itself is sufficient. There are many other factors that determine the development of a country, such as science and technology, culture and values, and external restrictions.
Power may be in the hands of the large majority, and one may be able to attain more equitable distribution, but yet have only misery to distribute. Science and technology - as drivers of wealth - are fundamental for development. Moreover, I believe that the political, economic, and social systems that will prevail in the future will be those that allow for the greatest scientific and technological advancement, but also –and this is very important– their best application for the common good. That is probably the secret of the success of the United States, a country where the top 1% of the population controls 35.6% of the wealth, and the top 10% controls 75% of the wealth. When economic power is so concentrated, it normally destroys a society, but as this system has made possible major technological advances and with them, increases in productivity and income, the lives of all have been improved.
The other fundamental factor for development is culture, understood as the set of ideas, beliefs, visions, and values about the world and society that are transmitted socially. The cultural perspective has been used to explain development, for example, by Max Weber in 1905, in his book The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. It is clear that a culture of innovation, of risk-taking, of freedom, but with responsibility and excellence, overcoming paternalism and victimization, propels the development and further generation of technology and innovation. 
But there are also external restrictions. For example, the Latin American structuralist school, specifically Raúl Prebish, introduced the concept of unfair trade, expressed through declining terms of trade, which led to the development of the strategy of import substitution. Nowadays, these external constraints continue with a new and unjust division of labor. 
Before, underdeveloped countries produced raw materials and hegemonic countries produced high value-added, industrial products. Today, this division is expressed by rich countries generating knowledge that is then privatized, and by our countries providing environmental goods that continue to be treated as free global public goods.
Simply by compensating environmental goods and services there would be an unprecedented global redistribution of income. Once again, this is a problem of power relationships but this time, at the international level. Just imagine for a moment, if the situation were the opposite: that the providers of environmental goods and services were the rich countries and our countries were the polluters. Almost certainly by now, we would have been invaded by the rich countries to force us to pay “a fair compensation”. 
Dear students:
The world order is not only unjust, it is immoral. It serves the most powerful, and double standards abound. In our example, the global public goods produced by poor countries should be free; whereas the public goods produced by hegemonic countries should be paid for, using institutional barriers such as patents. 
Dear audience:
To understand what is happening politically across Latin America, one needs only to look at the history of the United States. Despite being the oldest democracy in the world, the U.S. took centuries to fulfill the principles of equality and freedom embodied in its founding documents. 
The conviction that the U.S. was in fact a democracy existed even while suffrage was the sole province of wealthy white men, and African-Americans were enslaved for a century and subjected to brutal racism and segregation for another century after their emancipation. 
We find ourselves faced with a similar paradox in Latin America today. When the Latin American elites, including their media, speak of freedom and equality, they speak only for themselves. 
Like America’s Founding Fathers who preached equality yet themselves were slave owners, they are incapable of understanding that these fundamental rights should apply to everyone.
Poverty in Latin America is not the result of a lack of resources, but mainly of inequality resulting from a perverse power structure where historically the few dominate the many. But in ending the privileges and advantages historically given to select groups, we face fierce opposition from these same groups.
Many U.S. politicians (and many perhaps U.S. citizens) do not like it when leftist governments, who are in power in the majority of South American countries, achieve such success like Ecuador. 
The U.S. is the most powerful country on the planet, and one of the most successful in the history of mankind, but it is a huge mistake to think that all the values of the United States are universal values and should prevail everywhere.
But for those who want to monopolize the definition of sublime concepts such as "freedom", they should well understand that there can be no freedom without justice.
I believe in individual liberty, but without justice it is close to slavery, and that justice can only be achieved through collective action. 
And this is once again the politics that has been so demonized, understood as the way in which a society consciously makes its decisions. 
In Latin America, where not just economic but political and legal inequality plagues our continent, seeking justice is the only way to achieve true freedom.
Today, those of us in Latin America who try to transform paper democracies into true democracies are subversively attacked by those whose status and powers are being challenged. These individuals claim their freedom of expression is being denied, when in fact they seek impunity for their media to manipulate the truth. 
They make accusations that their human rights have been violated, because for once the law has been applied equally to everyone. And they cry “dictatorship” and “authoritarianism”, because they cannot bring the government to submit to their whims and interests.
Many Americans consider Abraham Lincoln to be the best president in history. Yet "tyrant”, “despot”, “fanatic”, “crazy" were just some of the insults thrown at him in his fight to abolish slavery. There is much to learn from Lincoln's example, namely that equality and freedom must trump popularity and expediency. 
“All men are created equal, they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” Those words were written when the United States was an aspiring democracy. 
In Ecuador and across Latin America, we also hold these truths to be self-evident, and we are making them a reality - not just for certain people or at some future time, but right now and for everyone.
Thank you very much.
Rafael Correa Delgado
CONSTITUTIONAL PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR