1 
 
 
INTERVENCIÓN EN LA III CUMBRE DE LA 
DEMOCRACIA  
Quito, 20 de marzo de 2024 
 
Good morning everyone. 
We meet today to talk about artificial intelligence, 
technology, and democracy; some time ago, these were 
three concepts that did not go together. Now we  live in a 
society of rapid changes marked by the pace imposed by 
technology. In recent years, social interaction and the way 
we communicate have changed rapidly. 
The massive use of cell phones, the Internet, social 
networks, and artificial intelligence is  hugely transforming 

2 
 
our daily lives, offering us great opportunities for progress 
and well-being, but this also poses significant challenges in 
terms of security.  
Cybercrime, cyberbullying and the spread of false 
information are problems that have a stro ng impact on 
society and put the very pillars of democracy at risk.  
These rapid changes in technology also mean increasing 
threats to democracies; Ecuador has recently faced 
enormous challenges to our peace, posed by transnational 
organized crime, terrorism and just pure evil.  
I am happy to share with you that the Ecuadorian people 
have united to face the forces that want to undermine our 
democratic system, by supporting a National Referendum 
that will take place on April 21. We are confident that the 
outcome of this process will provide new legal tools to 
strengthen our democracy. 
We are also committed to facing the challenges wit h 
determination, and to do so, w e have developed the 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) as part of the 
Telecommunications Regulation and Control Agency. 
This center is responsible for the prevention and 
management of information security incidents by monitoring 
and generating security warnings about malicious campaigns 
reported in Ecuador. 
3 
 
This problem requires articulated work and that is why CERT 
works at a national and international level with public and 
private sector institutions, as well as with other response 
teams against computer security incidents. 
While building this New Ecuador, we firmly believe in the 
importance of promoting a global culture of digital security. 
Digital literacy is the way to citizen empowerment and the 
identification of misinformation. 
My government recognizes and values international 
cooperation to fight crimes that do not respect borders, we 
must work together to obtain solid responses that 
consolidate our democratic aspirations and allow us to 
protect our citizens. 
Collaboration between strong and resilient democracies is 
essential to build a more just, prosperous, and secure world, 
which is wh y we must promote transparency, effective 
regulation, and cooperation between governments, 
companies, and civil society to identify digital threats. 
Looking ahead is essential to continue, exchanging ideas and 
proposals that allow us to build a safer and m ore ethical 
future. 
We must safeguard cyberspace from criminals and terrorists 
who seek to commit crimes or destabilize States and 
societies. 
4 
 
For this reason, Ecuador supports the initiative proposed by 
the UN Secretary -General regarding the importance of 
agreeing on a global framework that regulates and reinforces 
the supervision mechanisms for the use of databased 
technology, including AI (artificial intelligence) , and not 
allowing, of course, this to become a tool to attack people's 
freedom of expression. 
Taking into consideration the importance of trust, 
transparency, and accountability, it is desirable that progress 
and innovat ion in technologies, especially AI (artificial 
intelligence), be aligned with the UNESCO recommendations 
on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. 
The world needs defenders of democracy and Ecuador is 
committed to leading these efforts. I am sure that the 
exchange of ideas and proposals expressed in this Third 
Summit of Democracy will allow us to face the multiple 
challenges that our time demands. 
Thank you very much. 
 
DANIEL NOBOA AZIN 
Constitutional President of the Republic of Ecuador 
 
 
